PROLOGUE

The Hegemony Consul sat on the balcony of his ebony spaceship and played
Rachmaninoff's Prelude in C-sharp Minor on an ancient but
well-maintained Steinway while great, green, saurian things surged and
bellowed in the swamps below. A thunderstorm was brewing to the north.
Bruise-black clouds silhouetted a forest of giant gymnosperms while
stratocumulus towered nine kilometers high in a violent sky. Lightning
rippled along the horizon. Closer to the ship, occasional vague,
reptilian shapes would blunder into the interdiction field, cry out, and
then crash away through indigo mists. The Consul concentrated on a
difficult section of the Prelude and ignored the approach of storm and
nightfall.
The fatline receiver chimed.
The Consul stopped, fingers hovering above the keyboard, and listened.
Thunder rumbled through the heavy air. From the direction of the
gymnosperm forest there came the mournful ululation of a carrion-breed
pack. Somewhere in the darkness below, a small-brained beast trumpeted
its answering challenge and fell quiet.
The interdiction field added its sonic undertones to the sudden silence.
The fatline chimed again.
'Damn,' said the Consul and went in to answer it.
While the computer took a few seconds to convert and decode the burst of
decaying tachyons, the Consul poured himself a glass of Scotch. He
settled into the cushions of the projection pit just as the diskey
blinked green. 'Play,' he said.
'You have been chosen to return to Hyperion,' came a woman's husky
voice. Full visuals had not yet formed; the air remained empty except
for the pulse of transmission
codes which told the Consul that this fatline squirt had originated on
the Hegemony administrative world of Tau Ceti Center. The Consul did
not need the transmission coordinates to know this. The aged but still
beautiful voice of Meina Gladstone was unmistakable.
'You have been chosen to return to Hyperion as a member of the Shrike
Pilgrimage,' continued the voice.
The hell you say, thought the Consul and rose to leave the pit.
'You and six others have been selected by the Church of the Shrike and
confirmed by the All Thing,' said Meina Gladstone. 'It is in the
interest of the Hegemony that you accept."
The Consul stood motionless in the pit, his back to the flickering
transmission codes. Without turning, he raised his glass and drained
the last of the Scotch.
'The situation is very confused,' said Meina Gladstone. Her voice was
weary. 'The consulate and Home Rule Council fatlined us three standard
weeks ago with the news that the Time Tombs showed signs of opening. The
anti-entropic fields around them were expanding rapidly and the Shrike
has begun ranging as far south as the Bridle Range."
The Consul turned and dropped into the cushions. A hoio had formed of
Meina Gladstone's ancient face. Her eyes looked as tired as her voice
sounded.
'A FORCE:space task force was immediately dispatched from Parvati to
evacuate the Hegemony citizens on Hyperion before the Time Tombs open.
Their time-debt will be a little more than three Hyperion years." Meina
Gladstone paused. The Consul thought he had never seen the Senate CEO
look so grim. 'We do not know if the evacuation fleet will arrive in
time,' she said, 'but the situation is even more complicated. An Ouster
migration cluster of at least four thousand... units...
has been detected approaching the Hyperion system.
Our evacuation task force should arrive only a short while before the
Ousters."
The Consul understood Gladstone's hesitation. An Ouster migration
cluster might consist of ships ranging in size from single-person
ramscouts to can cities and comet forts holding tens of thousands of the
interstellar barbarians.
'The FORCE joint chiefs believe that this is the Ousters' big push,'
said Meina Gladstone. The ship's computer had positioned the holo so
that the woman's sad brown eyes seemed to be staring directly at the
Consul.
'Whether they seek to control just Hyperion for the Time Tombs or
whether this is an all-out attack on the Worldweb remains to be seen. In
the meantime, a full FORCE:space battle fleet complete with a fareaster
construction battalion has spun up from the Camn System to join the
evacuation task force, but this fleet may be recalled depending upon
circumstances."
The Consul nodded and absently raised the Scotch to his lips. He
frowned at the empty glass and dropped it onto the thick carpeting of
the holopit. Even with no military training he understood the difficult
tactical decision Gladstone and the joint chiefs were faced with.
Unless a military fareaster were hurriedly constructed in the Hyperion
system- at staggering expense- there would be no way to resist the
Ouster invasion. Whatever secrets the Time Tombs might hold would go to
the Hegemony's enemy. If the fleet did construct a farcaster in time
and the Hegemony committed the total resources of FORCE to defending the
single, distant, colonial world of Hyperion, the Worldweb ran the
terrible risk of suffering an Ouster attack elsewhere on the perimeter,
or- in a worst-case scenario- having the barbarians actually seizing the
farcaster and penetrating the Web itself. The Consul tried to imagine
the reality of armored Ouster troops stepping through farcaster portals
into the undefended home cities on a hundred worlds.
The Consul walked through the holo of Meina Gladstone, retrieved his
glass, and went to pour another Scotch.
'You have been chosen to join the pilgrimage to the Shrike,' said the
image of the old CEO whom the press loved to compare to Lincoln or
Churchill or Alvarez-Temp or whatever other pre-Hegira legend was in
historical vogue at the time. 'The Templars are sending their treeship
Yggdrasil!,' said Gladstone, 'and the
evacuation task force commander has instructions to let it pass. With a
three-week time-debt, you can rendezvous with the Yggdrasill before it
goes quantum from the Parvati system. The six other pilgrims chosen by
the Shrike Church will be aboard the treeship. Our intelligence reports
suggest that at least one of the seven pilgrims is an agent of the
Ousters. We do not... at this time... have any way of knowing which
one it is."
The Consul had to smile. Among all the other risks Gladstone was
taking, the old woman had to consider the possibility that he was the
spy and that she was fatlining crucial information to an Ouster agent.
Or had she given him any crucial information? The fleet movements were
detectable as soon as the ships used their Hawking drives, and if the
Consul were the spy, the CEO's revelation might be a way to scare him
off. The Consul's smile faded and he drank his Scotch.
'Sol Weintraub and Fedmahn Kassad are among the seven pilgrims chosen,'
said Gladstone.
The Consul's frown deepened. He stared at the cloud of digits
flickering like dust motes around the old woman's image. Fifteen
seconds of fatline transmission time remained.
'We need your help,' said Meina Gladstone. 'It is essential that the
secrets of the Time Tombs and Shrike be uncovered. This pilgrimage may
be our last chance. If the Ousters conquer Hyperion, their agent must
be eliminated and the Time Tombs sealed at all cost. The fate of the
Hegemony may depend upon it."
The transmission ended except for the pulse of rendezvous coordinates.
'Response?" asked the ship's computer.
Despite the tremendous energies involved, the spacecraft was capable of
placing a brief, coded squirt into the incessant babble of FTL bursts
which tied the human portions of the galaxy together.
'No,' said the Consul and went outside to lean on the balcony railing.
Night had fallen and the clouds were low. No stars were visible. The
darkness would have been absolute except for the intermittent flash of
lightning to the north and a soft phosphorescence rising from the
marshes. The Consul was suddenly very aware that he was, at that
second, the only sentient being on an unnamed world. He listened to the
antediluvian night sounds rising from the swamps and he thought about
morning, about setting out in the Vikken EMV at first light, about
spending the day in sunshine, about hunting big game in the fern forests
to the south and then returning to the ship in the evening for a good
steak and a cold beer. The Consul thought about the sharp pleasure of
the hunt and the equally sharp solace of solitude: solitude he had
earned through the pain and nightmare he had
already suffered on Hyperion.
Hyperion.
The Consul went inside, brought the balcony in, and sealed the ship just
as the first heavy raindrops began to fall. He climbed the spiral
staircase to his sleeping cabin at the apex of the ship. The circular
room was dark except for silent explosions of lightning which outlined
rivulets of rain coursing the skylight. The Consul stripped, lay back
on the firm mattress, and switched on the sound system and external
audio pickups. He listened as the fury of the storm blended with the
violence of Wagner's 'Flight of the Valkyries." Hurricane winds buffeted
the ship. The sound of thunderclaps filled the room as the skylight
flashed white, leaving afterimages burning in the Consu!'s retinas.
Wagner is good only for thunderstorms, he thought.
He closed his eyes but the lightning was visible through closed eyelids.
He remembered the glint of ice crystals blowing through the tumbled
ruins on the low hills near the Time Tombs and the colder gleam of steel
on the Shrike's impossible tree of metal thorns. He remembered screams
in the night and the hundred-facet, ruby and-blood gaze of the Shrike
itself.
Hyperion.
The Consul silently commanded the computer to shut off all speakers and
raised his wrist to cover his eyes. In the sudden silence he lay
thinking about how insane it would be to return to Hyperion. During his
eleven years as Consul on that distant and enigmatic world, the
mysterious Church of the Shrike had allowed a dozen barges of offworld
pilgrims to depart for the windswept barrens
around the Time Tombs, north of the mountains. No one had returned. And
that had been in normal times, when the Shrike had been prisoner to the
tides of time and forces no one understood, and the anti-entropic fields
had been contained to a few dozen meters around the Time Tombs. And
there had been no threat of an Ouster invasion.
The Consul thought of the Shrike, free to wander everywhere on Hyperion,
of the millions of indigenies and thousands of Hegemony citizens
helpless before a creature which defied physical laws and which
communicated only through death, and he shivered despite the
warmth of the cabin.
Hyperion.
The night and storm passed. Another stormfront raced ahead of the
approaching dawn. Gymnosperms two hundred meters tall bent and whipped
before the coming torrent. Just before first light, the Consul's ebony
spaceship rose on a tail of blue plasma and punched through thickening
clouds as it climbed toward space and rendezvous.
ONE
The Consul awoke with the peculiar headache, dry throat, and sense of
having forgotten a thousand dreams which only periods in cryogenic fugue
could bring. He blinked, sat upright on a low couch, and groggily
pushed away the last sensor tapes clinging to his skin. There were two
very short crew clones and one very tall, hooded Templar with him in the
windowless ovoid of a room. One of the clones offered the Consul the
traditional post-thaw glass of orange juice. He accepted it and drank
greedily.
'The Tree is two light-minutes and five hours of travel from Hyperion,'
said the Templar, and the Consul realized that he was being addressed by
Het Masteen, captain of the Templar treeship and True Voice of the Tree.
The Consul vaguely realized that it was a great honor to be awakened by
the Captain, but he was too groggy and disoriented from fugue to
appreciate it.
'The others have been awake for some hours,' said Het Masteen and
gestured for the clones to leave them.
'They have assembled on the foremost dining platform."
'Hhrghn,' said the Consul and took a drink. He cleared his throat and
tried again. 'Thank you, Het Masteen,' he managed. Looking around at
the egg-shaped room with its carpet of dark grass, translucent walls,
and support ribs of continuous, curved weirwood, the Consul realized
that he must be in one of the smaller environment pods. Closing his
eyes, he tried to recall his memories of rendezvous just before the
Templar ship went quantum.
The Consul remembered his first glimpse of the kilometer-long treeship
as he closed for rendezvous, the treeship's details blurred by the
redundant machine and
erg-generated containment fields which surrounded it like a spherical
mist, but its leafy bulk clearly ablaze with thousands of lights which
shone softly through leaves and thin-walled environment pods, or along
countless platforms, bridges, command decks, stairways, and bowers.
Around the base of the treeship, engineering and cargo spheres clustered
like oversized galls while blue and violet drive streamers trailed
behind like ten-kilometer-long roots.
'The others await,' Her Masteen said softly and nodded toward low
cushions where the Consul's luggage lay ready to open upon his command.
The Templar gazed thoughtfully at the weirwood rafters while the Consul
dressed in semiformal evening wear of loose black trousers, polished
ship boots, a white silk blouse which ballooned at waist and elbows,
topaz collar cinch, black demi-coat complete with slashes of Hegemony
crimson on the epaulets, and a soft gold tricorne. A section of curved
wall became a mirror and the Consul stared at the image there: a more
than middle-aged man in semi-formal evening wear, sunburned skin but
oddly pale under the sad eyes. The Consul frowned, nodded, and turned
away.
Het Masteen gestured and the Consul followed the tall, robed figure
through a dilation in the pod onto an ascending walkway which curved up
and out of sight around the massive bark wall of the treeship's trunk.
The Consul paused, moved to the edge of the walkway, and took a quick
step back. It was at least six hundred meters down- down being created
by the one-sixth standard gravity being generated by the singularities
imprisoned at the base of the tree - and there were no railings.
They resumed their silent ascent, turning off from the main trunk
walkway thirty meters and half a trunk-spiral later to cross a flimsy
suspension bridge to a five-meter-wide branch. They followed this
outward to where the riot of leaves caught the glare of Hyperion's sun.
'Has my ship been brought out of storage?" asked the Consul.
'It is fueled and ready in sphere eleven,' said Her Masteen. They
passed into the shadow of the trunk and stars became visible in the
black patches between the dark latticework of leaves. 'The other
pilgrims have agreed to ferry down in your ship if the FORCE authorities
give permission,' added the Templar.
The Consul rubbed his eyes and wished that he had been allowed more time
to retrieve his wits from the cold grip of cryonic fugue. 'You've been
in touch with the task force?"
'Oh, yes, we were challenged the moment we tunneled down from quantum
leap. A Hegemony warship is...
escorting us.. · this very moment." Het Masteen gestured toward a patch
of sky above them.
The Consul squinted upward but at that second segments of the upper
tiers of branches revolved out of the treeship's shadow and acres of
leaves ignited in sunset hues. Even in the still shadowed places,
glowbirds nestled like Japanese lanterns above lighted walkways, glowing
swingvines, and illuminated hanging bridges, while fireflies from Old
Earth and radiant gossamers from Maul-Covenant blinked and coded their
way through labyrinths of leaves, mixing with constellations
sufficiently to fool even the most starwise traveler.
Het Masteen stepped into a basket lift hanging from a whiskered-carbon
cable which disappeared into the three hundred meters of tree above
them. The Consul followed and they were borne silently upward. He
noted that the walkways, pods, and platforms were conspicuously empty
except for a few Templars and their diminutive crew clone counterparts.
The Consul could recall seeing no other passengers during his rushed
hour between rendezvous and fugue, but he had put that down to the
imminence of the treeship going quantum, assuming then that the
passengers were safe in their fugue couches. Now, however, the treeship
was traveling far below relativistic velocities and its branches should
be crowded with gawking passengers. He mentioned his observation to the
Templar.
'The six of you are our only passengers,' said Het Masteen. The basket
stopped in a maze of foliage and
the treeship captain led the way up a wooden escalator worn with age.
The Consul blinked in surprise. A Templar treeship normally carried
between two and five thousand passengers; it was easily the most
desirable way to travel between the stars. Treeships rarely accrued
more than a four- or five-month time-debt, making short, scenic
crossings where star systems were a very few light-years apart, thus
allowing their affluent passengers to spend as little time as necessary
in fugue. For the treeship to make the trip to Hyperion and back,
accumulating six years of Web time with no paying passengers would mean
a staggering financial loss to the Templars.
Then the Consul realized, belatedly, that the treeship would be ideal
for the upcoming evacuation, its expenses ultimately to be reimbursed by
the Hegemony.
Still, the Consul knew, to bring a ship as beautiful and vulnerable as
the Yggdrasill - one of only five of its kind - into a war zone was a
terrible risk for the Templar Brotherhood.
'Your fellow pilgrims,' announced Het Masteen as he and the Consul
emerged onto a broad platform where a small group waited at one end of a
long wooden table.
Above them the stars burned, rotating occasionally as the treeship
changed its pitch or yaw, while to either side a solid sphere of foliage
curved away like the green skin of some great fruit. The Consul
immediately recognized the setting as the Captain's dining platform,
even before the five other passengers rose to let Her Masteen take his
place at the head of the table. The Consul found an empty chair waiting
for him to the left of the Captain.
When everyone was seated and quiet, Het Masteen made formal
introductions. Although the Consul knew none of the others from
personal experience, several of the names were familiar and he used his
diplomat's long training to file away identities and impressions.
To the Consul's left sat Father Lenar Hoyt, a priest of the old-style
Christian sect known as Catholic. For a second the Consul had forgotten
the significance of the black clothing and Roman collar, but then he
remembered St Francis Hospital on Hebron where he had
received alcohol trauma therapy after his disastrous first diplomatic
assignment there almost four standard decades earlier. And at the
mention of Hoyt's name he remembered another priest, one who had
disappeared on Hyperion halfway through his own tenure there.
Lenar Hoyt was a young man by the Consul's reckoning - no more than his
early thirties - but it appeared that something had aged the man
terribly in the not too distant past. The Consul looked at the thin
face, cheekbones pressing against sallow flesh, eyes large but hooded in
deep hollows, thin lips set in a permanent twitch of muscle too
downturned to be called even a cynical smile, the hairline not so much
receding as ravaged by radiation, and he felt he was looking at a man
who had been ill for years. Still, the Consul was surprised that behind
that mask of concealed pain there remained the physical echo of the boy
in the man - the faintest remnants of the round face, fair skin, and
soft mouth which had belonged to a younger, healthier, less cynical
Lenar Hoyt.
Next to the priest sat a man whose image had been familiar to most
citizens of the Hegemony some years before. The Consul wondered if the
collective attention span in the Worldweb was as short now as it had
been when he had lived there. Shorter, probably. If so, then Colonel
Fedmahn Kassad, the so-called Butcher of South Bressia, was probably no
longer either infamous or famous. To the Consul's generation and to all
those who lived in the slow, expatriate fringe of things, Kassad was not
someone one was likely to forget.
Colonel Fedmahn Kassad was tall- almost tall enough to look the
two-meter Her Masteen in the eye - and dressed in FORCE black with no
rank insignia or citations showing. The black uniform was oddly similar
to Father Hoyt's garb, but there was no real resemblance between the two
men. In lieu of Hoyt's wasted appearance, Kassad was brown, obviously
fit, and whip-handle lean, with strands of muscle showing in shoulder,
wrist, and throat. The Colone!'s eyes were small, dark, and as
all-encompassing as the lenses of some primitive video camera. His face
was all angles: shadows, planes, and facets. Not gaunt like Father
Hoyt's, merely carved from cold stone. A thin line of beard along his
jawline served to accent the sharpness of his countenance as surely as
blood on a knife blade.
The Colonel's intense, slow movements reminded the Consul of an
Earth-bred jaguar he had seen in a private seedship zoo on Lusus many
years before. Kassad's voice was soft but the Consul did not fail to
notice that even the Colone!'s silences commanded attention.
Most of the long table was empty, the group clustered at one end. Across
from Fedmahn Kassad sat a man introduced as the poet Martin Silenus.
Silenus appeared to be quite the opposite of the military *****man
across from him. Where Kassad was lean and tall, Martin Silenus was
short and visibly out of shape.
Countering Kassad's stone-cut features, the poet's face was as mobile
and expressive as an Earth primate's. His voice was a loud, profane
rasp. There was something, thought the Consul, almost pleasantly
demonic about Martin Silenus, with his ruddy cheeks, broad mouth,
pitched eyebrows, sharp ears, and constantly moving hands sporting
fingers long enough to serve a concert pianist.
Or a strangler. The poet' s silver hair had been cropped into
rough-hewn bangs.
Martin Silenus seemed to be in his late fifties, but the Consul noticed
the telltale blue tinge to throat and palms and suspected that the man
had been through more than a few Poulsen treatments. Silenus's true age
might be anywhere from ninetytoa hundred and fiftystandard years. I f
he were close to the latter age, the Consul knew, the odds were that the
poet was quite mad.
As boisterous and animated as Martin Silenus seemed upon first
encounter, so the next guest at the table exuded an immediate and
equally impressive sense of intelligent reticence. Sol Weintranb looked
up upon introduction and the Consul noted the short gray beard, lined
forehead, and sad, luminous eyes of the we!i-known scholar. The Consul
had heard tales of the Wandering Jew and his hopeless quest, but he was
shocked to realize that the old man now held the infant in his arms -
his daughter Rachel, no more than a few weeks old. The Consul looked
away.
The sixth pilgrim and only woman at the table was Brawne Lamia. When
introduced, the detective stared at the Consul with such intensity that
he could feel the pressure of her gaze even after she looked away.
A former citizen of the 1.3-g world of Lusus, Brawne Lamia was no taller
than the poet two chairs to her right, but even her loose corduroy
shipsuit did not conceal the heavy layers of muscle on her compact form.
Black curls reached to her shoulders, her eyebrows were two dark lines
dabbed horizontally across a wide brow, and her nose was solid and
sharp, intensifying the aquiline quality of her stare. Lamia's mouth
was wide and expressive to the point of being sensuous, curled slightly
at the coruers in a slight smile which might be cruel or merely playful.
The woman's dark eyes seemed to dare the observer to discover which was
the case.
It occurred to the Consul that Brawne Lamia might well be considered
beautiful.
Introductions completed, the Consul cleared his throat and turned toward
the Templar. 'Het Masteen, you said that there were seven pilgrims. Is
M.
Weintraub's child the seventh?"
Het Masteen's hood moved slowly from side to side.
'No. Only those who make a conscious decision to seek the Shrike may be
counted among the pilgrims."
The group at the table stirred slightly. Each must know what the Consul
knew; only a group comprising a prime number of pilgrims might make the
Shrike Church-sponsored trip north.
'I am the seventh,' said Het Masteen, captain of the Templar treeship
ggdrasill and the True Voice of the Tree. In the silence which followed
the announcement, Her Masteen gestured and a group of crew clones began
serving the pilgrims their last meal before planetfall.
'So the Ousters are not in-system yet?" asked Brawne Lamia. Her voice
had a husky, throaty quality which strangely stirred the Consul.
'No,' said Het Masteen. 'But we cannot be more than a few standard days
ahead of them. Our instruments
have detected fusion skirmishes within the system's OOrt cloud."
'Will there be war."?" asked Father Hoyt. His voice seemed as fatigued
as his expression. When no one volunteered a response, the priest
turned to his right as if retroactively directing the question to the
Consul.
The Consul sighed. The crew clones had served wine; he wished it had
been whiskey. 'Who knows what the Ousters will do?" he said. 'They no
longer appear to be motivated by human logic."
Martin Silenus laughed loudly, spilling his wine as he gestured. 'As if
we fucking humans were ever motivated by human logic!" He took a deep
drink, wiped his mouth, and laughed again.
Brawne Lamia frowned. 'If the serious fighting starts too soon,' she
said, 'perhaps the authorities will not allow us to land."
'We will be allowed to pass,; said Her Masteen. Sunlight found its way
past folds in his cowl to fall on yellowish skin.
'Saved from certain death in war to be delivered to certain death at the
hands of the Shrike,' murmured Father Hoyt.
'There is no death in all the Universe!" intoned Martin Silenus in a
voice which the Consul felt sure could have awakened someone deep in
cryogenic fugue. The poet drained the last of his wine and' raised the
empty goblet in an apparent toast to the stars:
'No smellof death = there shall be no death, moan, moan; Moan, Cybele,
moan;for t hy pernicious Babes
Have changed a god into a shaking palsy.
Moan, brethren, moan, for l have no strength left;
Freak as the reed - weak - feeble as my voice- Oh, oh, thepain, thepain
of feebleness.
Moan, moan, for still l thaw..."
.Silenus abruptly broke off and poured more wine, belching once into
the silence which had followed his recitation.
The other six looked at one another. The Consul noticed that Sol
Weintraub was smiling slightly until the baby in his arms stirred and
distracted him.
'Well,' said Father Hoyt hesitantly, as if trying to retrieve an earlier
strand of thought, 'if the Hegemony convoy leaves and the Ousters take
Hyperion, perhaps the occupation will be bloodless and they'll let us go
about our business."
Colonel Fedmahn Kassad laughed softly. 'The Ousters don't want to
occupy Hyperion,' he said. 'If they take the planet they'll loot what
they want and then do what they do best. They'll burn the cities into
charred rubble, break the rubble into smaller' pieces, and then bake the
pieces until they glow. They'll melt the poles, boil the oceans, and
then use the residue to salt what's left of the continents so nothing
will ever grow there again."
'Well..." began Father Hoyt and then trailed off.
There was no conversation as the clones cleared the soup and salad
dishes and brought on the main course.
'You said that there was a Hegemony warship escorting us,' the Consul
said to Het Masteen as they finished their roast beef and boiled sky
squid.
The Templar nodded and pointed. The Consul squinted but could make out
nothing moving against the rotating starfield.
'Here,' said Fedmahn Kassad and leaned across Father Hoyt to hand the
Consul a collapsible pair of military binoculars.
The Consul nodded his thanks, thumbed on the power, and scanned the
patch of sky Het Masteen had indicated. Gyroscopic crystals in the
binoculars hummed slightly as they stabilized the optics and swept the
area in a programmed search pattern. Suddenly the image froze, blurred,
expanded, and steadied.
The Consul c6uld not avoid an involuntary intake of breath as the
Hegemony ship filled the viewer. Neither the expected field-blurred
seed of a solo ramscout nor the bulb of a torchship, the electronically
outlined image was of a matte-black attack carrier. The thing was
impressive in the way only warships through the centuries had succeeded
in being. The Hegemony spinship was incongruously streamlined with its
four
sets of boom arms retracted in battle readiness, its sixty-meter command
probe sharp as a Clovis point, and its Hawking drive and fusion blisters
set far back along the launch shaft like feathers on an arrow.
The Consul handed the binoculars back to Kassad without comment. If the
task force was using a full attack carrier to escort the Yggdrasili,
what kind of firepower were they setting in place to meet the Ouster
invasion?
'How long until we land?" askedBrawne Lamia. She had been using her
cornlog to access the treeship's datasphere and obviously was frustrated
with what she had found. Or had not found.
'Four hours until orbit,' murmured Het Masteen. 'A few minutes more by
dropship. Our consular friend has offered his private craft to ferry
you down."
'To Keats?" said Sol Weintraub. It was the first time the scholar had
spoken since dinner had been served.
The Consul nodded. 'It's still the only spaceport on Hyperion set to
handle passenger vehicles,' he said.
'Spaceport?" Father Hoyt sounded angry. 'I thought that we were going
straight to the north. To the Shrike's realm."
Het Mssteen patiently shook his head. 'The pilgrimage always begins
from the capital,' he said. 'It will take several days to reach the
Time Tombs."
'Several days,' snapped Brawne Lamia. 'That's absurd."
'Perhaps,' agreed Het Mssteen, 'but it is the case, nonetheless."
Father Hoyt looked as if something in the meal had caused him
indigestion even though he had eaten almost nothing. 'Look,' he said,
'couldn't we change the rules this once - I mean, given the war scare
and all? And just !and near the Time Tombs or wherever and get it over
with?"
The Consul shook his head. 'Spacecraft and aircraft have been trying to
take the short route to the northern moors for almost four hundred
years,' he said. 'l know of none who made it."
'May one inquire,' said Martin Silenus, happily raising his hand like a
schoolboy, 'just what the gibbering fuck happens to these legions of
ships?"
Father Hoyt frowned at the poet. Fedmahn Kassad smiled slightly. Sol
Weintraub said, 'The Consul did not mean to suggest that the area is
inaccessible. One may travel by ship or various !and routes. Nor do
spacecraft and aircraft disappear. They easily land near the ruins or
the Time Tombs and just as easily return to whatever point their
computers command. It is merely the pilots and passengers who are never
seen again." Weintraub lifted the sleeping baby from his lap and set her
in an infant carrier slung around his neck.
'So the tired old legend goes,' said Brawne Lamia.
'What do the ship logs show?"
'Nothing,' said the Consul. 'No violence. No forced entry. No
deviation from course. No unexplained time lapses. No unusual energy
emissions or depletions. No physical phenomena of any sort."
'No passengers,' said Het Masteen.
The Consul did a slow double take. If Het Masteen had, indeed, just
attempted a joke, it was the first sign in all of the Consu!'s decades
of dealing with the Templars that one of them had shown even a nascent
sense of humour. What the Consul could see of the Captain's vaguely
oriental features beneath the cowl gave no hint that a joke had been
attempted.
'Marvelous melodrama,' laughed Silenus. 'A real-life, Christ-weeping
Sargasso of Souls and we're for it.
Who orchestrates this shitpot of a plot, anyway?"
'Shut up,' said Brawne Lamia. 'You're drunk, old man."
The Consul sighed. The group had been together for less than a standard
hour.
Crew clones swept away the dishes and brought dessert trays showcasing
sherbets, coffees, treeship fruit, draums, tortes, and concoctions made
of Renaissance chocolate. Martin Silenus waved away the desserts and
told the clones to bring him another bottle of wine. The Consul
reflected a few seconds and then asked for a whiskey.
'It occurs to me,' Sol Weintraub said as the group was finishing
dessert, 'that our survival may depend upon our talking to one another."
'What do you mean?" asked Brawne Lamia.
Weintraub unconsciously rocked the child sleeping against his chest.
'For instance, does anyone here know why he or she was chosen by the
Shrike Church and the
All Thing to go on this voyage?"
No one spoke.
'I thought not,' said Weintraub. 'Even more fascinating, is anyone here
a member or follower of the Church of the Shrike7 I, for one, am a Jew,
and however confused my religious notions have become these days, they
do not include the worship of an organic killing machine." Weintraub
raised eyebrows and looked around the table.
'1 am the True Voice of the Tree,' said Het Masteen.
'While many Templars believe that the Shrike is the Avatar of punishment
for those who do not feed from the root, I must consider this a heresy
not founded in the Covenant or the writings of the Muir."
To the Captain's left, the Consul shrugged. 'I am an atheist,' he said,
holding the glass of whiskey to the light. '1 have never been in
contact with the Shrike cult."
Father Hoyt smiled without humor. 'The Catholic Church ordained me,' he
said. 'Shrike-worship contradicts everything the Church defends."
Colonel Kassad shook his head, whether in refusal to respond or to
indicate that he was not a member of the Shrike Church, it was not
clear.
Martin Silenus made an expansive gesture. '1 was baptized a Lutheran,'
he said. 'A subset which no longer exists. I helped create Zen
Gnosticism before any of your parents were born. i have been a
Catholic, a revelationist, a neo-Marxist, an interface zealot, a Bound
Shaker, a satanist, a bishop in the Church of Jake's Nada, and a
dues-paying subscriber to the Assured Reincarnation Institute. Now, I
am happy to say, I am a simple pagan." He smiled at everyone. 'To a
pagan,' he concluded, 'the Shrike is a most acceptable deity."
'1 ignore religions,' said Brawne Lamia. 'I do not succumb to them."
'My point has been made, I believe,' said Sol Weintraub. 'None of us
admits to subscribing to the Shrike cult dogma, yet the elders of that
perceptive group have chosen us over many millions of the petitioning
faithful to visit the Time Tombs... and their fierce god... in what
may be the last such pilgrimage."
The Consul shook his head. 'Your point may be made, M. Weintraub,' he
said, 'but I fail to see it."
The scholar absently stroked his beard. 'It would seem that our reasons
for returning to Hyperion are so compelling that even the Shrike Church
and the Hegemony probability intelligences agree that we deserve to
return,' he said. 'Some of these reasons - mine, for instance - may
appear to be public knowledge, but I am certain that none are known in
their entirety except to the individuals at this table. I suggest that
we share our stories in the few days remaining to us."
'Why?" said Colonel Kassad. 'It would seem to serve no purpose."
Weintraub smiled. 'On the. contrary, it would - at the very least -
amuse us and give at least a glimpse of our fellow travelers' souls
before the Shrike or some other calamity distracts us. Beyond that, it
might just give us enough i .nsight to save all of our lives if we are
intelligent enough to find the common thread of experience which binds
all our fates to the whim of the Shrike."
Martin Silenus laughed and closed his eyes. He said:
'Straddling each a dolphin's back
And steadied by a fin,
Those Innocents re-live their death,
Their wounds open again. '
'That's Lenista, isn't it?" said Father Hoyt. '1 studied her in
seminary."
'Close,' said Silenus, opening his eyes and pouring more wine. 'It's
Yeats. Bugger lived five hundred years before Lenista tugged at her
mother's metal teat."
'Look,' said Lamia, 'what good would telling each other stories do? When
we meet the Shrike, we tell it what we want, one of us is granted the
wish, and the others die. Correct?"
'So goes the myth,' said Weintraub.
'The Shrike is no myth,' said Kassad. 'Nor its steel tree."
'So why bore each other with stories?" asked Brawne Lamia, spearing the
last of her chocolate cheesecake.
Weintraub gently touched the back of his sleeping infant's head. 'We
live in strange times,' he said.
'Because we are part of that one tenth of one tenth of one percent of
the Hegemony's citizens who travel between the stars rather than along
the Web, we represent odd epochs of our own recent past. I, for
example, am sixty-eight standard years old, but because of the
time-debts my travels could have incurred, I might have spread these
threescore and eight years across well more
than a century of Hegemony history."
'So?" said the woman next to him.
Weintraub opened his hand in a gesture which included everyone at the
table. 'Among us we represent islands of time as well as separate
oceans of perspective.
Or perhaps more aptly put, each of us may hold a piece to a puzzle no
one else has been able to solve since humankind first landed on
Hyperion." Weintraub scratched his nose. 'It is a mystery,' he said,
'and to tell the truth, I am intrigued by mysteries even if this is to
be my last week of enjoying them. I would welcome some glimmer of
understanding but, failing that, working on the puzzle will suffice."
'I agree,' said Her Masteen with no emotion. 'It had not occurred to
me, but I see the wisdom of telling our tales before we confront the
Shrike."
'But what's to keep us from lying?" asked Brawne Lamia.
'Nothing." Martin Silenus grinned. 'That's the beauty of it."
'We should put it to a vote,' said the Consul. He was thinking about
Meina Gladstone's contention that one of the group was an Ouster agent.
Would hearing the stories be a way of revealing the spy? The Consul
smiled at the thought of an agent so stupid.
'Who decided that we are a happylittle democracy?" Colonel Kassad asked
dryly.
'We had better be,' said the Consul. 'To reach our individual goals,
this group needs to reach the Shrike regions
together. We require some means of making decisions." 'We could appoint
a leader,' said Kassad.
'Piss on that,' the poet said in a pleasant tone. Others at the table
also shook their heads.
'All right,' said the Consul, 'we vote. Our first decision relates to
M. Weintraub's suggestion that we tell the stories of our past
involvement with Hyperion."
'All or nothing,' said Her Masteen. 'We each share our story or none
does. We will abide by the will of the majority."
'Agreed,' said the Consul, suddenly curious to hear the others tell
their stories and equally sure that he would
never tell his own. 'Those in favor of telling our tales?" 'Yes,' said
Sol Weintraub.
'Yes,' said Het Masteen.
'Absolutely,' said Martin Silenus. 'I wouldn't miss this little comic
farce for a month in the orgasm baths on Shote."
'I vote yes also,' said the Consul, surprising himself.
'Those opposed?"
'Nay,' said Father Hoyt but there was no energy in his voice.
'1 think it's stupid,' said Brawne Lamia.
The Consul turned to Kassad. 'Colonel?" Fedmahn Kassad shrugged.
' I register four yes votes, two negatives, and one abstention,' said
the Consul. 'The ayes have it. Who wants to start?"
The table was silent. Finally Martin Silenus looked up from where he
had been writing on a small pad of paper.
He tore a sheet into several smaller strips. 'I've recorded numbers
from one to seven,' he said. 'Why don't we draw lots and go in the
order we draw?"
'That seems rather childish, doesn't it?" said M. Lamia.
'i'm a childish fellow,' responded Silenus with his
satyr's smile· 'Ambassador'-he nodded toward the Consul- 'could I borrow
that gilded pillow you're wearing for a hat?"
The Consul handed over his tricorne, the folded slips were dropped in,
and the hat passed around. Sol Weintraub was the first to draw, Martin
Silenus the last.
The Consul unfolded his slip, making sure that no one else could see it.
He was number seven. Tension ebbed out of him like air out of an
overinflated balloon. It was quite possible, he reasoned, that events
would intercede before he had to tell his story. Or the war would make
everything academic. Or the group could lose interest in stories. Or
the king could die. Or the horse could die. Or he could teach the
horse how to talk.
No more whiskey, thought the Consul.
'Who's first?" asked Martin Silenus.
In the brief silence, the Consul could hear leaves stirring to unfelt
breezes.
'1 am,' said Father Hoyt. The priest's expression showed the same
barely submerged acceptance of pain which the Consul had seen on the
faces of terminally ill friends. Hoyt held up his slip of paper with a
large 1 clearly scrawled on it.
'All right,' said Silenus. 'Start."
'Now?" asked the priest.
'Why not?" said the poet. The only sign that Silenus had finished at
least two bottles of wine was a slight darkening of the already ruddy
cheeks and a somewhat more demonic tilt to the pitched eyebrows. 'We
have a few hours before planetfall,' he said, 'and I for one plan to
sleep off the freezer fugue when we're safely down and settled among the
simple natives."
'Our friend has a point,' Sol Weintraub said softly. 'If the tales are
to be told, the hour after dinner each day is a civilized time to tell
them."
Father Hoyt sighed and stood. 'Just a minute,' he said and left the
dining platform.
After some minutes had passed, Brawne Lamia said, 'Do you think he's
lost his nerve?"
'No,' said Lenar Hoyt, emerging from the darkness at the head of the
wooden escalator which served as the main staircase· '! needed these."
He dropped two small, stained notebooks on the table as he took his
seat.
'No fair reading stories from a primer,' said Silenus.
'These are to be our own tall tales, Magus!'
'Shut up, damn it!" cried Hoyt. He ran a hand across his face, touched
his chest. For the second time that night, the Consul knew that he was
looking at a seriously ill man.
'I'm sorry,' said Father Hoyt. 'But if I'm to tell my ·.. my tale, I
have to tell someone else's story as well.
These journals belong to the man who was the reason for my coming to
Hyperion . . . and why I am returning today." Hoyt took a deep
breath.
The Consul touched the journals. They were begrimed and charred, as if
they had survived a fire. 'Your friend has old-fashioned tastes,' he
said, 'if he still keeps a written journal."
'Yes,' said Hoyt. 'If you're all ready, I will begin." The group at the
table nodded. Beneath the dining platform, a kilometer of treeship
drove through the cold night with the strong pulse of a living thing.
Sol Weintraub lifted his sleeping child from the infant carrier and
carefully set her on a cushioned mat on the floor near his chair. He
removed his comlog, set it near the mat, and programmed the diskey for
white noise. The week-old infant lay on her stomach and slept.
The Consul leaned far back and found the blue and green star which was
Hyperion. It seemed to grow larger even as he watched. Het Masteen
drew his cowl forward until only shadows showed for his face. Sol
Weintraub lighted a pipe. Others accepted refills of coffee and settled
back in their chairs.
Martin Silenus seemed the most avid and expectant of the listeners as he
leaned forward and whispered:
'He seyde, "Syn I shal bigynne the game,
What, welcome be the cut, a Goddes name!
Now !at us ryde, and herkneth what i seye."
And with that word we ryden forth oure weye;
And he bigan with right a myrie cheere
His tale anon, and seyde as ye may heere. '
THE PRIEST'S TALE: 'The Man Who Cried God'
'Sometimes there is a thin line separating orthodox zeal from apostasy,'
said Father Lenar Hoyt.
So began the priest's story. Later, dictating the tale into his
cornlog, the Consul remembered it as a seamless whole, minus the pauses,
hoarse voice, false starts, and small redundancies which were the
timeless failings of human speech.
Lenar Hoyt had been a young priest, born, raised, and only recently
ordained on the Catholic world of Pacem, when he was given his first
offworld assignment: he was ordered to escort the respected Jesuit
Father Paul Dur into quiet exile on the colony world of Hyperion.
In another time, Father Paul Dur certainly would have become a bishop
and perhaps a pope. Tall, thin, ascetic, with white hair receding from
a noble brow and eyes too filled with the sharp edge 'of experience to
hide their pain, Paul Dur was a follower of St Tellhard as well as an
archaeologist, ethnologist, and eminent Jesuit theologian. Despite the
decline of the Catholic Church into what amounted to a half-forgotten
cult tolerated because of its quaintness and isolation from the
mainstream of Hegemony life, Jesuit logic had not lost its bite. Nor
had Father Dur lost his conviction that the Holy Catholic Apostolic
Church continued to be humankind's last, best hope for immortality.
To Lenar Hoyt as a boy, Father Dur had been a somewhat godlike figure
when glimpsed during his rare visits to the preseminary schools, or on
the would-be seminarian's even rarer visits to the New Vatican. Then,
during the years of Hoyt's study in seminary, Dur had been on an
important Church-sponsored archaeological dig on the nearby world of
Armaghast. When the Jesuit returned, a few weeks after Hoyt's
ordination, it had been under a cloud. No one outside the highest
circles of the New Vatican knew precisely what had happened, but there
were whispers of excommunication and even of a hearing before the Holy
Office of the Inquisition, dormant the four centuries since the
confusion following the death of Earth.
Instead, Father Dur had asked for a posting to Hyperion, a world most
people knew of only because of the bizarre Shrike cult which had
originated there, and Father Hoyt had been chosen to accompany him. It
would be a thankless job, traveling in a role which combined the worst
aspects of apprentice, escort, and spy without even the satisfaction of
seeing a new world; Hoyt was under orders to see Father Dur down to the
Hyperion spaceport and then reboard the same spinship for its return
voyage to the Worldweb. What the bishopric was offering Lenar Hoyt was
twenty months in cryogenic fugue, a few weeks of in-system travel at
either end of the voyage, and a time-debt which would return him to
Pacem eight years behind his former classmates in the quest for Vatican
careers and missionary postings.
Bound by obedience and schooled in discipline, Lenar Hoyt accepted
without question.
Their transport, the aging spinship HS Nadia Oleg, was a pockmarked
metal tub with no artificial gravity of any sort when it was not under
drive, no viewports for the passengers, and no on-board recreation
except for the stimsims piped into the datalink to keep passengers in
their hammocks and fugue couches. After awakening from fugue, the
passengers - mostly offworld workers and economy-rate tourists with a
few cult mystics and would-be Shrike suicides thrown in for good measure
-slept in those same hammocks and fugue couches, ate recycled food in
featureless mess decks, and generally tried to cope with spacesickness
and boredom during their twelve-day, zero-g glide from their spinout
point to Hyperion.
Father Hoyt learned little from Father Dur during those days of forced
intimacy, nothing at all about the events on Armaghast which had sent
the senior priest into exile. The younger man had keyed his comlog
implant to seek out as much data as it could on Hyperion and, by the
time they were three days out from planet fall,
Father Hoyt considered himself somewhat of an expert on the world.
'There are records of Catholics coming to Hyperion but no mention of a
diocese there,' said Hoyt one evening as they hung talking in their
zero-g hammocks while most of their fellow passengers lay tuned into
erotic stimsims. '1 presume you're going down to do some mission work?"
'Not at all,' replied Father Dur. 'The good people of Hyperion have
done nothing to foist their religious opinions on me, so I see no reason
to offend them with my proselytizing. Actually, I hope to travel to the
southern continent- Aquila- and then find a way inland from the city of
Port Romance. But not in the guise of a missionary. I plan to set up
an ethnological research station along the Cleft."
'Research?" Father Hoyt had echoed in surprise. He closed his eyes to
key his implant. Looking again at Father Dur, he said, 'That section of
the Pinion Plateau isn't inhabited, Father. The flame forests make it
totally inaccessible most of the year."
Father Dur smiled and nodded. He carried no implant and his ancient
condog had been in his luggage for the duration of the trip. 'Not quite
inaccessible,' he said softly. 'And not quite uninhabited. The Bikura
live there."
'Bikura,' Father Hoyt said and closed his eyes. 'But they're just a
legend,' he said at last.
'Hmmm,' said Father Dur. 'Try cross-indexing through Mamet Spedling."
Father Hoyt closed his eyes again. General Index told him that Mamet
Spedling had been a minor explorer affiliated with the Shackleton
Institute on Renaissance Minor who, almost a standard century and a half
earlier, had filed a short report with the Institute in which he told of
hacking his way inland from the then newly settled Port Romance, through
swamplands which had since been reclaimed for fiberplastic plantations,
passing through the flame forests during a period of rare quietude, and
climbing high enough on the Pinion Plateau to encounter the Cleft and a
small tribe of humans who fit the profile of the legendary Bikura.
Spedling's brief notes hypothesized that the humans were survivors of a
missing seedship colony from three centuries earlier and clearly
described a group suffering all of the classic retrograde cultural
effects of extreme isolation, inhreeding, and overadaptation. In
Spedling's blunt words, '. · even after less than two days here it is
obvious that the Bikura are too stupid, lethargic, and dull to waste
time describing." As it turned out, the flame forests then began to show
some signs of becoming active and Spedling had not wasted any more time
observing his discovery but had rushed to reach the coast, losing four
indigenie bearers, all of his equipment and records, and his left arm to
the 'quiet' forest in the three months it took him to escape.
'My God,' Father Hoyt had said as he lay in his hammock on the Nadia
Oleg, 'why the Bikura?"
'Why not?" had been Father Dur's mild reply. 'Very little is known
about them."
'Very little is known about most of Hyperion,' said the younger priest,
becoming somewhat agitated. 'What about the Time Tombs and the
legendary Shrike north of the Bridle Range on Equus?" he said. 'They're
famous!'
'Precisely,' said Father Dur6. 'Lenar, how many learned papers have
been written on the Tombs and the Shrike creature? Hundreds?
Thousands?" The aging priest had tamped in tobacco and now lighted his
pipe: no small feat in zero-g, Hoyt observed. 'Besides,' said Paul
Dur6, 'even if the Shrike-thing is real, it is not human. I am partial
to human beings."
'Yes,' said Hoyt, ransacking his mental arsenal for potent arguments,
'but the Bikura are such a small mystery. At the most you're going to
find a few dozen indigenies living in a region so cloudy and smoky and
... unimportant that even the colony's own mapsats haven't noticed
them. Why choose them when there are big mysteries to study on
Hyperion.. · like the labyrinths!' Hoyt had brightened. 'Did you know
that Hyperion is one of the nine labyrinthine worlds, Father?"
'Of course,' said Dur. A rough hemisphere of smoke expanded from him
until air currents broke it into tendrils and tributaries. 'But the
labyrinths have their researchers and admirers throughout the Web,
Lenar, and the tunnels have been there - on all nine worlds -for how
long? Half a million standard years? Closer to three quarters of a
million, I believe. Their secret will last. But how long will the
Bikura culture last before they're absorbed into modern colonial society
or, more likely, are simply wiped out by circumstances?"
Hoyt shrugged. 'Perhaps they're already gone. It's been a long time
since Spedling's encounter with them and there haven't been any other
confirmed reports. If they are extinct as a group, then all of your
time-debt and labor and pain of getting there will be for nothing."
'Precisely,' was all that Father Paul Dur had said and puffed calmly on
his pipe.
It was in their last hour together, during the dropship ride down, that
Father Hoyt had gained the slightest glimpse into his companion's
thoughts. The limb of Hyperion had been glowing white and green and
lapis above them for hours when suddenly the old dropship had cut into
the upper layers of atmosphere, flame had briefly filled the window, and
then they were flying silently some sixty kilometers above dark cloud
masses and starlit seas with the hurtling terminator of Hyperion's
sunrise rushing toward them like a spectral tidal wave of light.
'Marvelous,' Paul Dur had whispered, more to himself than to his young
companion. 'Marvelous. It is at times like this that I have the
sense... the slightest sense · . . of what a sacrifice it must have
been for the Son of God to condescend to become the Son of Man."
Hoyt had wanted to talk then, but Father Dur had continued to stare out
the window, lost in thought. Ten minutes later they had landed at Keats
Interstellar, Father Dur was soon swept into the whirlpool of customs
and luggage rituals, and twenty minutes after that a thoroughly
disappointed Lenar Hoyt was rising toward space and the Nadia Oleg once
again.
'Five weeks later of my time, I returned to Pacem,' said Father Hoyt. 'I
had mislaid eight years but for some reason my sense of loss randeeper
than that simple fact.
Immediately upon my return, the bishop informed me that there had been
no word from Paul Dur during the four years of his stay on Hyperion. The
New Vatican had spent a fortune on fatline inquiries, but neither the
colonial authorities nor the consulate in Keats had been able to locate
the missing priest."
Hoyt paused to sip from his water glass and the Consul said, 'I remember
the search. I never met Dur6, of course, but we did our best to trace
him. Theo, my aide, spent a lot of energy over the years trying to
solve the case of the missing cleric. Other than a few contra-dietory
reports of sightings in Port Romance, there was no trace of him. And
those sightings went back to the weeks right after his arrival, years
before. There were hundreds of plantations out there with no radios or
cornlines, primarily because they were harvesting bootleg drugs as well
as fiberplastic. I guess we never talked to the people at the right
plantation. At least I know Father Dur's file was still open when I
left."
Father Hoyt nodded. 'I landed in Keats a month after your replacement
had taken over at the consulate. The bishop had been astonished when I
volunteered to return. His Holiness himself granted me an audience. I
was on Hyperion less than seven of its local months. By the time I left
to return to the Web, I had discovered the fate of Father Dur6." Hoyt
tapped the two stained leather books on the table. 'If I am to complete
this,' he said, his voice thick, '1 must read excerpts from these."
The treeship Yggdrasill had turned so the bulk of the tree had blocked
the sun. The effect was to plunge the dining platform and the curved
canopy of leaves beneath it into night, but instead of a few thousand
stars dotting the sky, as would have been the case from a planet's
surface, literally a million suns blazed above, beside, and beneath the
group at the table. Hyperion was a distinct sphere now, hurtling
directly at them like some deadly missile.
'Read,' said Martin Silenus.
FROM THE JOURNAL OF FATHER PAUL DURI :
Day l:
So begins my exile.
I am somewhat at a loss as to how to date my new journal. By the
monastic calendar on Pacere, it is the seventeenth day of Thomasmonth in
the Year of Our Lord 2732. By Hegemony Standard, it is October 12, 589
p.c. By Hyperion reckoning, or so I am told by the wizened little clerk
in the old hotel where I am staying, it is the twentyzthird day of
Lycius (the last of their seven forty-day months), either 426 A.D.C.
(after dropship crash!) or the hundred and twenty-eighth year of the
reign of Sad King Billy, who has not reigned for at least a hundred of
those years.
To hell with it. I'll call it Day I of my exile.
Exhausting day. (Strange to be tired after months of sleep, but that is
said to be a common reaction after awakening from fugue. My cells feel
the fatigue of Ihese past months of travel even if I do not remember
them. I don't remember feeling this tired from travel when I was
younger.)
I felt bad about not getting to know young Hoyt better. He seems a
decent sort, all proper catechism and bright eyes. It's no fault of
youngsters like him that the Church is in its final days. It's just
that his brand of happy naivet6 can do nothing to arrest that slide into
oblivion which the Church seems destined for.
Well, my contributions have not helped either.
Brilliant view of my new world as the dropship brought us down. I was
able to make out two of the three continents- Equus and Aquila. The
third one, Ursa, was not visible.
Planetfall at Keats and hours of effort getting through customs and
taking ground transit into the city. Confused images: the mountain
range to the north with its shifting, blue haze, foothills forested with
orange and yellow trees, pale sky with its green-blue undercoating, the
sun too small but more brilliant than Pacem's.
Colors seem more vivid from a distance, dissolving and scattering as one
approaches, like a pointi!!ist's palette.
The great sculpture of Sad King Billy which I had heard so much about
was oddly disappointing. Seen from the highway, it looked raw and
rough, a hasty sketch chiseled from the dark mountain, rather than the
regal figure I had expected. It does brood over this ramshackle city of
half a million people in a way that the neurotic poet-king probably
would have appreciated.
The town itself seems to be separated into the sprawling maze of slums
and saloons which the locals call Jacktown and Keats itself, the
so-called Old City although it dates back only four centuries, all
polished stone and studied sterility. I will take the tour soon.
I had scheduled a month in Keats but already I am eager to press on. Oh,
Monsignor Edouard, if you could see me now. Punished but still
unrepentant. More alone than ever but strangely satisfied with my new
exile. If my punishment for past excesses brought about by my zeal is
to be banishment to the seventh circle of desolation, then Hyperion was
well chosen. I could forget my self-appointed mission to the distant
Bikura (are they real? 1 think not this night) and content myself with
living out the remainder of my years in this provincial capital on this
godforsaken backwater world. My exile would be no less complete.
Ah, Edouard, boys together, classmates together (although I was not so
brilliant nor so orthodox as you), now old men together. But now you
are four years wiser and I am still the mischievous, unrepentant boy you
remember. I pray that you are alive and well and praying for me.
Tired. Will sleep. Tomorrow, take the tour of Keats, eat well, and
arrange transport to Aquila and points south.
Day $:
There is a cathedral in Keats. Or, rather, there was one. It has been
abandoned for at least two standard centuries. It lies in ruins with
its transept open to the green-blue skies, one of its western towers
unfinished, and the other tower a skeletal framework of tumbled stone
and rusted reinforcement rods.
I stumbled upon it while wandering, lost, along the banks of the Hoolie
River in the 'sparsely populated section of town where the Old City
decays into Jacktown amid a jumble of tall warehouses which prevent even
a glimpse of the ruined towers of the cathedral until one turns a corner
onto a narrow cul-de-sac and there is the shell of the cathedral; its
chapter house has half fallen away into the river, its facade is pocked
with remnants of the mournful, apocalyptic statuary of the post-Hegira
expansionist period.
I wandered through the latticework of shadows and fallen blocks into the
nave. The bishopric on Paccm had not mentioned any history of
Catholicism on Hyperion, much less the presence of a cathedral. It is
almost inconceivable that the scattered seedship colony of four
centuries ago could have supported a large enough congregation to
warrant the presence of a bishop, much less a cathedral. Yet there it
was.
I poked through the shadows of the sacristy. Dust and powdered plaster
hung in the air like incense, outlining two shafts of sunlight streaming
down from narrow windows high above. I stepped out into a broader patch
of sunlight and approached an altar stripped of all decoration except
for chips and cracks caused by falling masonry. The great cross which
had hung on the east wall behind the altar had also fallen and now lay
in ceramic splinters among the heap of stones there. Without conscious
thought ! stepped behind the altar, raised my arms, and began the
celebration of the Eucharist.
There was no sense of parody or melodrama in this act, no symbolism or
hidden intention; it was merely the automatic reaction of a priest who
had said Mass almost daily for more than forty-six years of his life and
who
now faced the prospect of never again participating in the reassuring
ritual of that celebration.
It was with some shock that I realized I had a congregation.
The old woman was kneeling in the fourth row of pews. The black of her
dress and scarf blended so perfectly with the shadows there that only
the pale oval of her face was visible, lined and ancient, floating
disembodied in the darkness. Startled, I stopped speaking the litany of
consecration. She was looking at me but something about her eyes, even
at a distance, instantly convinced me that she was blind. For a moment
I could not speak and stood there mute, squinting in the dusty light
bathing the altar, trying to explain this spectral image to myself while
at the same time attempting to frame an explanation of my own presence
and actions.
When I did find my voice and called to her- the words echoing in the
great hall - I realized that she had moved. I could hear her feet
scraping on the stone floor.
There was a rasping sound and then a brief flare of light illuminated
her profile far to the right of the altar. I shielded my eyes from the
shafts of sunlight and began picking my way over the detritus where the
altar railing had once stood. I called to her again, offered
reassurances, and told her not to be afraid, even though it was I who
had chills coursing up my back. I moved quickly but when I reached the
sheltered corner of the nave she was gone. A small door led to the
crumbling chapter house and the riverbank. There was no sign of her. 1
returned to the dark interior and would have gladly attributed her
appearance to my imagination, a waking dream after so many months of
enforced cryogenic dreamlesshess, but for a single, tangible proof of
her presence. There in the cool darkness burned a lone red votive
candle, its tiny flame flickering to unseen drafts and currents.
I am tired of this city. I am tired of its pagan pretensions and false
histories. Hyperion is a poet's world devoid of poetry. Keats itself
is a mixture of tawdry, false classicism and mindless, boomtown energy.
There are three Zen Gnostic assemblies and four High Muslim mosques in
the town, but the real houses
of worship are the countless saloons and brothels, the huge marketplaces
handling the fiberplastic shipments from the south, and the Shrike Cult
temples where lost souls hide their suicidal hopelessness behind a
shield of shallow mysticism. The whole planet reeks of mysticism
without revelation.
To hell with it.
Tomorrow I head south. There are skimmers and other aircraft on this
absurd world but, for the Common Folk, travel between these accursed
island continents seems restricted to boat- which takes forever, I am
told- or one of the huge passenger dirigibles which de!arts from Keats
only once a week.
I leave early tomorrow by dirigible.
Day 10:
Animals.
The firstdown team for this planet must have had a f',ation on animals.
Horse, Bear, Eagle. For three days we were creeping down the east coast
of Equus over an irregular coastline called the Mane. We've spent the
last day making the crossing of a short span of the Middle Sea to a
large island called Cat Key. Today we are offloading passengers and
freight at Felix, the 'major city' of the island. From what I can see
from the observation promenade and the mooring tower, there can't be
more than five thousand people living in that random collection of
hovels and barracks.
Next the ship will make its eight-hundred-kilometer crawl down a series
of smaller islands called the Nine Tails and then take a bold leap
across seven hundred kilometers of open sea and the equator. The next
land we see then is the northwest coast of Aquila, the
so-called Beak.
Animals.
To call this conveyance a 'passenger dirigible' is an exercise in
creative semantics. It is a huge lifting device with cargo holds large
enough to carry the town of Felix out to sea and still have room for
thousands of bales of
fiberplastic. Meanwhile, the less important cargo - we passengers -
make do wherewe can. I have set up a cot near the aft loading portal
.and made a rather comfortable niche for myself with my personal luggage
and three large trunks of expedition gear. Near me is a family of
eight- indigenie plantation workers returning from a biannual shopping
expedition of their own to Keats -and although I do not mind the sound
or scent of their caged pigs or the squeal of their food hamsters, the
incessant, confused crowing of their poor befuddled rooster is more than
I can stand some nights.
Animals!
Day 11:
Dinner tonight in the salon above the promenade deck with Citizen
Heremis Denzel, a retired professor from a small planters' college near
Endymion. He informed me that the Hyperion firstdown team had no animal
fetish after all; the official names of the three continents are not
Equus, Ursa, and Aquila, but Creighton, Allensen, and Lopez. He went on
to say that this was in honor of three middle-level bureaucrats in the
old Survey Service.
Better the animal fetish!
It is after dinner. I am alone on the outside promenade to watch the
sunset. The walkway here is sheltered by the forward cargo modules so
the wind is little more than a salt-tinged breeze. Above me curves the
orange and green skin of the dirigible. We are between islands; the sea
is a rich lapis shot through with verdant undertones, a reversal of sky
tones. A scattering of high cirrus catches the last light of Hyperion's
too-small sun and ignites like burning coral. There is no sound except
for the faintest hum of the electric turbines. Three hundred meters
below, the shadow of a huge, mantalike undersea creature keeps pace with
the dirigible. A second ago an insect or bird the size and color of a
hummingbird but with gossamer wings a meter across paused five meters
out to inspect me before diving toward the sea with folded wings.
Edouard, 1 feel very alone tonight. !t would help if 1 knew you were
alive, still wbrking in the garden, writing evenings in your study. I
thought my travels would stir my-old beliefs in St Teilhard's concept of
the God in Whom the Christ of Evolution, the Personal, and the
Universal, the En Haut and the En.4 vant are joined, but no such renewal
is forthcoming.
It is growing dark. I am growing old. I feel something ·.. not yet
remorse . .. at my sin of falsifying the evidence on the Armaghast
dig. But, Edouard, Your Excellency, if the artifacts had indicated the
presence of a Christ-oriented culture there, six hundred light-years
from Old Earth, almost three thousand years before man left the surface
of the homeworld...
Was it so dark a sin to interpret such ambiguous data in a way which
would have meant the resurgence of Christianity in our life-time?
Yes, it was. But not, I think, because of the sin of tampering with the
data, but the deeper sin of thinking that Christianity could be saved.
The Church is dying, Edouard. And not merely our beloved branch of the
Holy Tree, but all of its offshoots, vestiges and cankers.
The entire Body of Christ is dying as surely as this poorly used body of
mine, Edouard. You and I knew this in Armaghast, where the blood-sun
illuminated only dust and death. We knew it that cool, green summer at
the College when we took our first vows. We knew it as boys in the
quiet playfields of Villefranche-sur-SaSne. We know it now.
The light is gone now; I must write by the slight glow from the salon
windows a deck above. The stars lie in strange constellations. The
Middle Sea glows at night with a greenish, unhealthy phosphorescence.
There is a dark mass on the horizon to the southeast. It may be a storm
or it may be the next island in the chain, the third of the nine
'tails." (What mythology deals with a cat with nine tails? I know of
none.)
For the sake of the bird I saw earlier - if it was a bird - I pray that
it is an island ahead and not a storm.
Day 28:
I have been in Port Romance eight days and I have seen three dead men.
The first was a beached corpse, a bloated, white parody of a man, that
had washed up on the mud flats beyond the mooring tower my first evening
in town.
Children threw stones at it.
The second man I watched being pulled from the burned wreckage of a
methane-unit shop in the poor section of town near my hotel. His body
was charred beyond recognition and shrunken by the heat, his arms and
legs pulled tight in the prizefighter posture burning victims have been
reduced to since time immemorial. I had been fasting all day and I
confess with shame that I began to salivate when the air filled with the
rich, frying-fat odor of burned flesh.
The third man was murdered not three meters from me. I had just emerged
from the hotel onto the maze of mud-splattered planks that serve as
sidewalks in this miserable town when shots rang out and a man several
paces ahead of me lurched as if his foot had slipped, spun toward me
with a qui=ical look on his face, and fell sideways into the mud and
sewage.
He had been shot three times with some sort of projectile weapon. Two
of the bullets had struck his chest, the third entered just below the
left eye.
Incredibly, he was still breathing when I reached him.
Without thinking about it, I removed my stole from my carrying bag,
fumbled for the vial of holy water 1 had carried for so long, and
proceeded to perform the sac-rameut of Extreme Unction. No one in the
gathering crowd objected. The fallen man stirred once, cleared his
throat as if he were about to speak, and died. The crowd dispersed even
before the body was removed.
The man was middle-aged, sandy-haired, and slightly overweight. He
carried no identification, not even a universal card or comlog. There
were six silver coins in his pocket.
For some reason, I elected to stay with the body the rest of that day.
The doctor was a short and cynical man
who allowed me to stay during the required autopsy. !
suspect that he was starved for conversation.
'This is what the whole thing's worth,' he said as he opened the poor
man'd belly like a pink satchel, pulling the folds of skin and muscle
back and pinning them down like tent flaps.
'What thing?" I asked.
'His life,' said the doctor and pulled the skin of the corpse's face up
and back like a greasy mask. 'Your life.
My life." The red and white stripes of overlapping muscle turned to blue
bruise around the ragged hole just above the cheekbone.
'There has to be more than this,' I said.
The doctor looked up from his grim work with a bemused smile. 'Is
there?" he said. 'Please show me." He lifted the man's heart and seemed
to weigh it in one hand. 'In the Web worlds, this'd be worth some money
on the open market. There're those too poor to keep vat-grown, cloned
parts in store, but too well off to die just for want of a heart. But
out here it's just offal."
'There has to be more,' I said, although I felt little conviction. I
remembered the funeral of His Holiness Pope Urban XV shortly before I
left Pacem. As has been the custom since pre-Heglra days, the corpse
was not embalmed. It waited in the anteroom off the main basilica to be
fitted for the plain wooden coffin. As I helped Edouard and Monsignor
Frey place the vestments on the stiffened corpse I noticed the browning
skin and slackening mouth.
The doctor shrugged and finished the perfunctory autopsy. There was the
briefest of formal inquiries. No suspect was found, no motive put
forward. A description of the murdered man was sent to Keats but the
man himself was buried the next day in a pauper's field between the mud
flats and the yellow jungle.
Port Romance is a jumble of yellow, weirwood structures set on a maze of
scaffolds and planks stretching far out onto the tidal mud flats at the
mouth of the Kans.
The river is almost two kilometers wide here where it spills out into
Toschahai Bay, but only a few channels are navigable and the dredging
goes on day and night. !
lie awake each night in my cheap room with the window open to the
pounding of the dredge-hammer sounding like the booming of this vile
city's heart, the distant susurration of the surf its wet breathing.
Tonight I listen to the city breathe and cannot help but give it the
flayed face of the murdered man.
The companies keep a skimmerport on the edge of town to ferry men and
matriel inland to the larger plantations, but 1 do not have enough money
to bribe my way aboard. Rather, I could get myself aboard but cannot
afford to transport my three trunks of medical and scientific gear. I
am still tempted. My service among the Bikura seems more absurd and
irrational now than ever before. Only my strange need for a destination
and a certain masochistic determination to complete the terms of my
self-imposed exile keep me moving upriver.
There is a riverboat departing up the Kans in two days. I have booked
passage and will move my trunks onto it tomorrow. It will not be hard
to leave Port Romance behind.
Day 41:
The Emporotic Girandole continues its slow progress upriver. No sight
of human habitation since we left Melton's Landing two days ago. The
jungle presses down to the riverbank like a solid wall now; more, it
almost completely overhangs us in places where the river narrows to
thirty or forty meterS. The light itself is yellow, rich as liquid
butter, filtered as it is through foliage and fronds eighty meters above
the brown surface of the Kans. I sit on the rusted tin roof of the
center passenger barge and strain to make out my first glimpse of a
tesla tree. Old Kady sitting nearby pauses in his whittling, spits over
the side through a gap in his teeth, and laughs at me. 'Ain't going to
be no flame trees this far down,' he says. 'If they was the forest sure
all hell wouldn't look like this. You got to get up in the Pinions
before you see a tesla. We ain't out of the rain forest yet, Padre."
It rains every afternoon. Actually, rain is too gentle a term for the
deluge that strikes us each day, obscuring the shore, pounding the tin
roofs of the barges with a deafening roar, and slowing our upstream
crawl until it seems we are standing still. It is ns if the river
becomes a vertical torrent each afternoon, a waterfall which the ship
must climb if we are to go on.
The Oirandole is an ancient, flat-bottomed tow with five barges lashed
around it like ragged children clinging to their tired motheris skins.
Three of the two-level barges carry bales of goods to be traded or sold
at the few plantations and settlements along the river. The other two
offer a simulacrum of lodging for the indigenies traveling upriver,
although I suspect that some of the barge's residents are permanent. My
own berth boasts a stained mattress on the floor and lizard-like insects
on the walls.

